Malthusian trap:
One way of reframing the trap is in terms of the marginal excess productivity per capita. Take E(p) = GDP(p) - Expenses(p) where GDP and Expenses are both marginal per capita values. What we are interested at is both E(p) at reasonable population sizes, along with E'(p), or at least the sign of E'(p).

If E(p) is positive and E'(p) is negative, then there's a cap on the maximum population of your settlement (think of an island, for example). Even if standard population growth brings it past p, other mechanisms must bring it back below p for it to be sustained.

If E(p) is negative and E'(p) is positive (our case here), then the economy is not self starting. At some p < p_crit (where E'(p) = 0), the population will decline to 0. As such, the initial population of the settlement needs to be at least p_crit for the colony to be self sustaining.

A less mathy way of putting it would be something like
Each new person needs to produce more economically than the total cost of their upkeep. As both of these scale with the number of people in different ways (for example, better education or more investment in technology increases the amount produced per person, economies of scale decrease the expenses per person), this needs to be maintained from the initial population of the colony through to the projected maximum size.
Questions:

1. What are the three branches of government?

In a standard government there are three main branches, designed to form 'checks and balances' between each other.

1. The executive branch - the branch that is responsible for the day to day operations of the government.

2. The legislative branch - this branch is responsible for creating and updating new laws

3. The judicial branch - this branch is responsible for enforcing the laws created by the legislative branch.

In the system we are devising, we have included the 'Examination Yuan' or Auditor branch from the Taiwanese government (see http://constitutionnet.org/sites/default/files/2019-09/Independent-regulatory-and-oversight-fourth-branch-institutions.pdf ) they are explicitly a check on the other branches of government.

In this implementation, the executive branch would continue essentially as it currently exists, with the major difference being that the head of each of the departments and the like would be given its policies and 'marching orders' from the delegative democracy rather than from a political party.

2. What is put to a vote?
Two major components:
a) Procedural votes.
i) Judicial procedural votes - In the event that the common law is ambiguous in a matter, the matter may be put forth as a binding plebiscite. The results of which then become a component of the common law. As an example "Should the definition of X include [scenario Y] Y/N". This somewhat supplants the need for a supreme court, and issues caused by that - for example, many cases never being seen as the court only has very limited capacity to hear cases. 

ii) Executive procedural votes, as determined by previous procedural laws determining the powers each executive department has in itself. Whenever they are looking to do something that exceeds their autonomous power, they need to issue a vote for approval. As an example, if the education department did not have authority to increase it's own funding, it would issue a vote for "Increasing educational funding to $Z ". Other examples would be for large projects that, by law, require approval. ie. the public infrastructure authority would like to extend the XYZ train line to station Z, Y/N.


b) Citizen's petitions -
Taking a leaf from the Swiss hybrid direct democratic model (
http://constitutionnet.org/sites/default/files/2019-09/Independent-regulatory-and-oversight-fourth-branch-institutions.pdf ) - any group of citizens can issue a petition to either put something to vote, or to add an option to an existing vote. After it meets the criteria (in terms of number of votes within a certain time, dependent on the type of petition it is), the matter is either put to vote, or the new choice is added.

As an example, the teachers union would put forward a petition to increase education funding going towards teachers salaries without needing the cooperation of the education department. As long as it could gain enough votes within the time limits required, it would switch to being a proper vote, voted on by everybody, with the result then being binding.

As an aside: Direct democracy is “a constraint that forces political elites to adopt a strategy of co-operation rather than confrontation” (Papadopoulos, 2001)


Re. Power:
Eu average power needs are ~1kwe average per person. Looking at international figures, it looks like colder climates generally need more energy. Norway is ~3kwe/person. 1M people would therefore be 1gwe average at 1kwe, or 3gwe at 3kwe.

https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/124412/Bachelors Thesis Molten Salt Reactors Metropolia Aleksi Nieminen.pdf

Using $800M for 1GWE reactor (very approximate costing), with a design lifetime of ~50 years, that's ~$2M/month/GWE in repayments. 

Estimate: 10GWth -> 3GWe electric turbines, 3GWe cryobattery turbines. Max can be ~3x average. Running at a much lower efficiency than normal, as creating extra thermal energy is cheap compared to the turbines and the like. Cryobattery capacity of 24h, so 36GWE nameplate storage capacity - this is shared with the LN2 blanket, so can be 'overdriven' as needed at the cost of additional loss of O2.

https://www.aemc.gov.au/energy-system/electricity/electricity-market/spot-and-contract-markets


Re. The nature of delegative democracy.


Where does political power come from?
-> "Political power grows from the barrel of a gun" - Mao
-> Political power comes from the belief by the majority of the selectorate that the status quo is better for them than a rival - Paraphrased, the dictators handbook https://www.amazon.com/Dictators-Handbook-Behavior-Almost-Politics/dp/1610391845

Where the selectorate are the power brokers in society. This then leads to the government redirecting resources to the selectorate over the greater populous. This is most obvious in autocratic societies where the selectorate is small (a handful of generals, police leaders, etc), who generally live lavish lives while the rest of the populous starves.

In natural resource rich countries, the selectorate is also generally small, as reasonably few people are needed to extract and sell the natural resources in order for the country to make money. This leads to 'the resource curse'.

In a district based representational democracy, the selectorate is unevenly distributed due to gerrymandering. This is due to the fundamental flaw that the number of votes per seat won in a district based representational democracy isn't fixed, and can be significantly modified for the benefit of one party over another. As the number of votes per seat won is uneven, and as the return per vote bought is uneven as the effect is nonlinear (once a seat is won, return becomes zero), distributing resources based on the marginal return per vote is erratic at best and is inefficient.

This is exacerbated in systems with a fixed number of seats with a growing population - See the reapportionment act of 1929 in the US which fixed the number of seats in congress at 435. This means that the number of Americans represented by each congressperson increases significantly over time.

Another major issue is that of representation - representational democracies can only have so many parties. In the case of first past the post systems, that generally means two broad parties - as splitting any party to form multiple more focused parties is suicide as they will never win the votes required to gain any form of electoral power. In the case of proportional systems a few major parties may emerge, forming government in coalition (see NZ or Norway for this). These are generally better governments, but they still can't fully represent the multitude of values of the citizens as a whole. Specifically, political parties represent clusters of values that generally correlate. But there's no real requirement that they do, and citizens with political values that sit on multiple clusters generally have no effective representation.

A further point is that representatives are elected to act in the best interests of their constituents, but the drivers they have don't push them to do that. They need to be rel elected (as discussed in depth in the dictators handbook), and they are generally interested in their own life, both at the time and after politics. But 'acting in order to be re elected' 'acting in what your constituents would consider their best interests' and 'acting in your constituents best interests' are at best three distinct concepts.

Delegative democracy doesn't have those issues. The selectorate is the entire population. There are no seats and so the effective 'power' of every vote is the same.

Another major advantage is that it diffuses power. Unlike a representative system, where you have few major parties who all generally have leaders, in a delegative system the concept of a 'leader' loses meaning. Is it a group of people with sway over economic matters? Diplomatic matters? Labor reform? Those are all likely different groups of people, who are themselves not likely to be consolidated. This diffuse power base both limits the effects of lobbying or other coercion (as delegates have considerably less power over a more limited domain), it also helps safeguard the system by making it less likely that a consolidated power base will be able to attempt to subvert the Auditor arm and attempt to simply cheat it's way to victory.

Direct democracy has always had the flaw that the majority of the issues of state aren't interesting to most people, and so getting people to vote is difficult - in the 5th C BC, slaves would herd Athenians from the Agora into the Pnyx for votes, to ensure that enough eligible citizens were there to allow for votes.

One key issue with delegative democracy is that it has no concept of a 'term limit' for a delegate by default, and so nothing to prevent the aggregation of power. There's also nothing to prevent lobbying and the like by default. There is also nothing in particular to prevent a totalitarian style leader (See Bob Altemeyer's book 'The authoritarians'), from collecting Authoritarian followers to form a populist bloc.

There's also a loose idea of a constitution, given that constitutions are generally amended through a plebiscite of sorts - a concept that can be generalised by having particular laws or particular types of laws (ie. laws on the structure and form of voting, etc), that require some arbitrary barrier (say 80% or more) to be changed rather than a simple majority.

There's also only a loose idea of what to do for 'continuity of government' in case the standard voting system stops running. The closest answer is to form the delegative tree, finding the most popular delegate at each stage, and then using that as a fixed cabinet until infrastructure can be restored.

This infrastructure also needs to be secure and inspectable for it to be trustable at scale. Something like Andrew Huang's 'betrusted' https://betrusted.io/ would make a good starting point for this.

One other aside is that a simple version of this model can be built basically as is on top of the Monero cryptocurrency. The monero crptocurrency has at it's core two major innovations - that wallets have both a spend key and a view key. The view key being a key that can be used to verify what coins were sent to a wallet without knowing anything else. The second is that it allows anonymous spending of coins.

Take a set of voters, V. They produce some certificate containing a public spend key S_v, view key V_v, along with some signature verifying their identity (for delegation) along with verifying that they are authorized to vote in this election. At time t=0, the genesis block is mined and transactions are created to send every Voter 1/nth of the genesis coin. This can be verified by any observer using the view keys. A set of keys are created for the vote results via key aggregation between the voters. They publish the jointly created public spend key, and view key for these vote result wallets. With the public spend key, any voter can send coins to the vote wallets. With the vote view key, any observer can verify the total amount of coins sent to any of the vote wallets. As the private spend keys are never distributed from any voter, the group private spend key can never be formed and so the coins that end up at the vote wallets are lost forever. This is fine, as the subnet is designed to run for the duration of the vote before being archived and reset.

This base version can be extended to allow for preference voting through the use of multiple rounds. With N choices, N rounds are required. On round one the votes are cast, the choice with the lowest number of votes is eliminated, the remaining choices then move on to the next round. As of round N, there is only one choice which has won the runoff.

In practice this would all be almost entirely automated, with a smart card providing voter identification, and a Betrusted device doing the crypto and talking with the network. The only real user interaction would be selecting their choice for either the vote, or to delegate.

This is also verifyable, as on a trusted computing platform some portion of nodes can output audit logs for verification by the voter. This portion would be determined through some fair and unbiased method, such as the xor distance between the voters public key and some hash of the final vote totals. Given the private keys used in the procedure and the blockchain itself, it is then possible to verify every step is exactly correct. As it's impossible to know if any particular device will be audited until after the computation is complete, and given that all information needed to complete the audit is on a publicly accessible blockchain, it therefore forms a strong basis for the security of the system.It also prevents any particular voter from being coersed into proving who they voted for.

https://web.getmonero.org/library/Zero-to-Monero-2-0-0.pdf

AI:
An idea that got cut, but may be useful.

The idea is to take a combination of STRIPS goal directed pathfinding (http://www.diag.uniroma1.it/degiacom/didattica/dottorato-stavros-vassos/AI&Games-Lecture1-part2.pdf) and deep reinforcement learning to provide an agent to manage environments in an automated way. This would then be layered on top of prolog style business logic for anything that would be safety critical.

This is useful as building a simulation to reasonably model a system is considerably easier than trying than trying to build a custom system to do the long term planning and control optimally. It's also a lot easier to make and verify logic in a single system.

This would then tie back in to the delegative democracy, as the people would be able to tweak or modify the goals or the objective functions of the system (within some bounds), allowing the behaviour of the machine to be decided.

A related idea is that of machine readable governance. That is:
a) All official notices and the like are issued in machine readable form
b) All forms and other inputs, when practical, can be provided through a machine readable format
c) The mechanisms that process all of that data, running the 'business logic' of the government itself, is all public and open to inspection by the public.
d) The data of any individual is owned by that individual, with GDPR style rights of access and modification of bad data
e) The more general data of society is accessible either i) Directly, where no privacy issues can exist. ii) Through a FOIA request, where privacy issues could exist but can be managed, or iii) Through verification through the Audit branch, where privacy or other issues cannot be managed.
f) These standards would be extended to include regulated companies, for example banks and the like.

The practical consequence is the mechanisms of government then fit in to a wider automated picture, allowing for a significantly more efficient system. As an example, saying that the train timetable must exist in a machine readable and documented format then allows for anything that interacts with the trains can build or automate around that. 





Re. the cold.

One of the major challenges of the poles as a location is the cold - -130 - -150C at the pole itself. (~-125 dry ice snowfall? https://www.dlr.de/content/en/articles/news/2017/20170202_mars-north-pole-chronicle-of-the-martian-climate_20844.html )

There is some disagreement on exactly how cold it gets, from what I can tell.

10.1126/science.194.4271.1341 - Outside korolev crater is -33C, inside is -60C, measured on one summer day.

One big plus is that forming caverns out of melting ice, when you have a nuclear power plant, is incredibly easy compared to trying to carve out chambers underground. Especially in permafrost style soil like you would find in Utopia planetia/etc. The water ice also acts as a radiation shield and thermal protective barrier.

This isn't as bad as it seems:
1. The thermal conductivity of Co2 is less than half of normal air - < 10mw/mk vs. 24mw/mk (miliwats) https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/air-properties-viscosity-conductivity-heat-capacity-d_1509.html
2. The heat lost is proportional to the difference in temperatures based on that conductivity. The difference between a 15c inside temperature and a -40c outside temperature (winter in minnesota, northern europe) is approx 2.4x the difference between a 15c inside temperature and a -130c outside temperature (on mars). That cancels out well against the difference in the thermal conductivity of the atmospheric materials. This then means that the thermal insulation required would be approximately equivalent to that used in northern europe or america.


This still leaves the standard challenges to do with low temperature pressure seals, but after decades of dealing with cryogenic propellants this is more an inconvenience and an engineering limitation than something that would block the mission.

This also makes it much easier to make and keep cryogenic propellants, as the thermal difference needed to be worked around (~50c for LOX) is much easier to work with. Especially as the tanks get larger (for example, large spherical tanks carved into the ice and lined with insulation), as the rate of thermal conductivity is proportional to the surface area (smallest for a sphere, 4pir^2) vs. the volume (4/3 pi r^3).

This is also very interesting as the point at commercial superconductive tape (YBCO tape) is superconductive at -180C, which is again only ~50C away from ambient in the poles. Using a composite cable built around a YBCO core, with a metal outer core with channels cut for liquid argon to pass through (BP -185C), covered with any standard insulator, reasonably cheap superconducting cables can be created and used on Mars.

This is obviously useful in things like power distribution, transformers and the like. What's more esoteric are things like SEMS' which store energy in the superconducting magnetic field. These are generally expensive on earth, mostly due to the cost of refrigeration. These offer the ability to store and retrieve immense amounts of power, at a fraction of the cost of large scale capacitor banks.

in "YBCO superconductor wire based on IBAD-textured templates and RCE of YBCO: Process economics" we see current prices of YBCO tape at $400/kAm, with predictions of a drop down to <$10/Kam. The active component itself is only microns thick, so should be able to be shipped cheaply and reintegrated on a new substrate on Mars. 

This also makes the cryocoolers useful, as they can reliquify the argon, and maintain long runs of cable with minimal power requirements.

Of critical importance is that Korolev crater is above the martian actic circle (73 degrees north vs. ~67 degrees for the arctic circle), and so during summer there will be light constantly and winter will be constant darkness where everything will freeze.

Units of conductivity are Watt meters / m^2 k, or W/mk. Oleic acid doesn't have solid numbers on thermal conductivity but Parafin wax has both high thermal capacity (2.5j/k g) along with thermal conductivity of ~0.1w/mk. Assuming flux of ~500W/M^2, 0.1 = 500WM/1k, so with a difference of 100K, 0.1 = 500M/100, 0.1 = 5M, M = 0.02M of wax will form a simple steady state. As such, during summer it is reasonable to assume that the farms will be able to retain heat (todo: second calculation on that?), and in winter they'll freeze. Enough oxygen must be safeguarded for that.

Oxygen requirement = 0.8kg/day/person. 1M people = 1M kg/day. 1 martian year = 686 days. One season = 171 days. 171M kg oxygen to keep 1M people breathing through the winter. Density of LO2 = 1141 kg/m3. Dividing = 14986m^3 of oxygen needed. A tank with radius of 16m would be sufficient to store that. That's reasonable.

If you have a farm that's aiming not to freeze during autumn, it's going to be throwing off excess waste heat during summer.

http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2017/ph240/black1/docs/nasa-tm-102299.pdf <-- paper on solar irradiance.

Latent heat of vaporization of O2 is ~7kj/mol, 213j/g. 1T of oxygen ~60kwh to liquify. 1GWH to liquefy enough oxygen for 171 days.

The colony sitting within the ice then has the benefit of 4.18j/k*g * trillions of tons of ice to form a stable thermal environment. The majority of the colony never needs to see the thermal extremes, only things out dome. Even airlocks - A two stage airlock, with the first stage having a rough fit seal heating the internal atmosphere to some useful intermediate before a standard airlock would allow for standard cheap high reliability seals. As atm pressure is so low, thermal capacity of the atm is also low, so even with some leakage the energy loss is minimal.

Interesting thought experiment:
Assume a perfectly black surface, sitting under 1M of parafin wax (as a clear insulator). Assume -60 above the ice, 0c on the ice.
0.1 = xM/M^2K
1M^2, 1m thick 0.1=x/60, x = 6. 6W radiated back to atmo.

Water has thermal conductivity ~0.5, ice block is atmo temp. x wats radiated to ice.
0.5 = xM/K, 0.5=xM/60 
30 = xM
x = 30 / M
400w = 30/M
M = 0.075 in eq. 

So neglecting convection (needs proper sim), a 10cm thick layer of water would be enough to be net positive on energy absorption in the middle of the martian summer.

To rephrase - at the moment during summer the light hits a glacier with an albedo of about 1 (bare sea ice can be ~0.7 https://nsidc.org/cryosphere/seaice/processes/albedo.html ). This is then in an atmosphere with a pressure far too low to support liquid water, so any heat not lost to the heat sink that is a trillion tons of ice is lost to sublimating the ice uselessly.

On the other hand, if we have a black sheet (with an albedo of ~0), with both sufficient pressure to allow liquid water to form, you can fairly easily have a sustained water pocket even without an insulated tank. With a constructed tank lined with insulation, things are even easier.

Re. Radiators for intercooling in Joule/Thompson liquification.
A core mechanism in the base is the production of large quantities of liquified gasses. This is done through fairly standard compressor stages (run from turbines directly), intercooled using chilled water. This has the advantage in that it can reject very large amounts of heat (generated from the compression of the gas), but has the disadvantage in that it can only cool down to ~0C easily. Ammonia chilling can get down to ~-30C, but requires significantly more energy to operate. Using a methanol cooled radiator out in on the ice, reasonably small (per m^2) amounts of energy can be dissapated passively into the atmosphere, allowing for small amounts of gas to be easily chilled down to ~-100C using chilled methanol. The primary issue with this is both the size of the mechanism limits the amount of energy that can be dissipated, and that if outside temperatures drop the heat exchangers temp below the freezing point of methanol (~-100C), the heat exchanger needs to be made safe and turned off. But it does allow for a mostly passive method of aiding in the last stage in liqiuification.


https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/jun/18/worlds-biggest-liquid-air-battery-starts-construction-in-uk - 80 million pounds for 250MHW storage, Apparently ~50MWe output. LAES plant.
https://www.highviewpower.com/plants/

Thesis on liquid air storage:
https://kth.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1216213/FULLTEXT01.pdf


Major question of the why of a lot of technology:
Major choices -> No large scale pressure vessels. Minimal use of exotic metallurgy that wouldn't be easy to reproduce on mars. Using materials that can be mass produced on mars preferred. Energy should also be conserved -> Things like Moxies, or even straight up electrolysis to make oxygen is too wasteful to be useful.

As an example, TSSE vs. reverse osmosis. Reverse osmosis requires membranes that are hard to fabricate, high pressure pumps, etc. TSSE requires chemicals that can be readily made by the ton, in some very standard industrial chemistry gear running in standard conditions.

As another example, using a molten salt reactor allows for the creation of large amounts of thermal energy cheaply, with only reasonably small amounts of exotic metallurgy. Using LP turbines (instead of HP turbines, which are essentially impossible to make on mars, and essentially impossible to make on earth, launch to space and then drop on mars without breaking), more energy can be extracted at the expense of efficiency. This then makes waste heat cheap for industrial processes (process heat). As a related point, but sitting on an ice brick allows for the efficient generation of incredible amounts of power, as you have a heat sink. Without that heat sink, large scale power generation of mars is limited by thermal dissipation to the atmosphere, which is very limited per square meter. This greatly increases the cost of power, even if the cost of actually producing the heat is cheap.

Why dig into ice? Building large pressure vessels as a habitat is incredibly expensive, especially at the pressures required to maintain human life. Borrowing underground removes that issue, but replaces it with the incredible cost of digging through permafrost at any useful speed. Closing up lava tunnels is another possibility that is also viable, but you're stuck with whatever the ground has given you. There is also unlikely to be a heatsink suitable to run the heat engines of civilisation.

Also an important question of comparative advantage' -> What are the things that this colony can do that others can't. What can it produce cheaper, and so why would the universe place production of those things there?

Diagram showing mars seasons - https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4b/Mars_earth_orbit.svg


TODO: Thickness vs. thermal radiation calculation
- Tank size vs. people days sustained calculation

Culture/architecture:

Demographics pulled from Gambia and scaled -> 30 births/1000 pop. Growth rate ~40%, fertility rate 3.5 children/woman. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_the_Gambia)

-> 10.1007/s00148-005-0024-0 report on incentives vs. family size.
'Overall, these empirical findings suggest that increased expenditure on family policy programs aimed at empowering women through opportunities to combine family and employment thereby reducing the opportunity cost of children generate positive fertility responses. More specifically, extending maternity and parental leave and childcare provisions causes women to have children earlier in life and to have more children.' https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3000017/

Neoconfucian/Neocalvanist hybrid
-> Learning and testing is important. Tests determine what jobs can be taken - factory work vs. knowledge work.
-> Feedback loop operating as the education system pushes for higher marks along with more independent learning/group projects to foster a spirit of entrepreneurship  
-> Consumerist. Social status demonstrated through conspicuous consumption/consumer goods.
-> Knowledge and learning is important. Libraries and other public spaces would be large, designed to be the focal point of the dome
-> Hard work and innovation praised/rewarded. Belief in the 'American dream' if you work hard enough.
-> Large families promoted 
-> Respect for 'elders', society as a whole and common spaces.
-> Government promotion of leaders in science/technology/business
-> Patriotic pride in the achievements and of the hard work of the earlier generations in building the settlement
-> Settlement day monuments, holidays, etc. over the sacrifices of their families in founding the colony - At this point in history, most of the founders would be found in close family trees, so the sacrifices would be seen as personal.
-> Belief in the vision of the terraformed dome
-> Belief in the function of the government, as the government is the voice of the people - the 'vox populi'
-> Unique food and food culture revolving around larger shared meals with friends and family
-> Strong work ethic
-> Games played, tv watched, etc. in shared communal spaces with friends and family. More team games.
-> People are more compressed - less of a culture of personal space, more of the culturally enforced 'blindness' to the people around them. 
-> Architecture of shared spaces, dining spaces, entertainment spaces, etc. is ornate and expensive as opposed to the mass produced 'suburbia' of standard commercial/industrial segments
-> Music is based on shared experiences. Uplifting, patriotic music (government promoted) on the success of the various projects. Angry music when social unrest is left to fester. Sad music when tragedy strikes. Music and art are exported back to earth, where it's popular due to it's uniqueness - unique circumstances produce unique art.
-> Social export programs promoting Martian culture/cultural products, where the government backs the promotion and distribution of cultural products, to make Martian culture a distinct but critical part of earth culture. With the unique accent martians form, this makes them instantly recognisable and also changes things musically, etc. - different things will rhyme, words and sentences will have different rhythm, etc.
-> Movie/tv studios use the unique setting to produce movies/tv shows that make use of the new surroundings/different culture/etc. to form new plotlines that draw in audiences. This is bankrolled by the government both to help promote martian culture, but also as a money making venture. This also helps to fund less popular but more useful material like documentaries and the like, which help raise awareness.

Architecture:
-> Designed as large underice domes, cut into regular floors/sections. Each section then has it's own internal architecture
-> Multiple smaller domes hooked up through a rail system
-> Small 'green room' gardens with fountains, ponds (hooked to the Aquaculture system), with grow lights.
-> Dome 'aquariums' with plastic roofing looking up into the domes with lights, looking up at the marine animals through the ice.
-> Hybrid indoor/outdoor segments, that open up to the lake outside such that the air pressure inside the segment equals the water pressure outside, so marine life (usually fish from the fish farms) can freely swim inside/outside
-> Hybrid beach for recreation. Same idea as the indoor/outdoor segment, but with artificial sand and warmed water for people to swim in instead of fish
-> Architecture is designed around the sloped outer walls, with a utilitarian theme. Many areas are mass produced and mass assembled, with only important buildings being unique. Mass produced -> Brutalist. Unique areas -> Parameterist produced via 3d printers for flamboyant buildings in public spaces, Neoclassical for government buildings and other 'straight laced' buildings, specifically with neoroman ties such as having a central courtyard for greenery.  

-> Painted lines on the floor showing routes to various parts of each dome
-> Central elevator for transporting people and freight from the train station at the bottom level through the dome, through to the surface if the dome reaches the surface


